#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass csuthesisLyx
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 0
\use_package amssymb 0
\use_package cancel 0
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 0
\use_package mathtools 0
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 0
\use_package stmaryrd 0
\use_package undertilde 0
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
This describes the thesis
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction to Neutrinos
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The history of the neutrino can be traced back to electron energy spectrum
 observed in neutron 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

-decay.
 While measurements of 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha$
\end_inset

- and 
\begin_inset Formula $\gamma$
\end_inset

-decay of atomic nuclei showed discrete spectral lines, the electron (
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

 particle) exhibited a continuous energy spectrum.
 Experimentally, there were two observed particles in each decay process
 and classical physics dictated that the outgoing daughter particles should
 have discrete energies.
 The fact that the 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

-decay spectrum was not this way posed a fundamental problem for physicists
 in the mid-1910s and later, was energy conserved? Two solutions were postulated
: either the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

energy conservation law is only valid statistically in such a process [...]
 or an additional undetectable new particle [...] carrying away the additional
 energy and spin [...] is emitted 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "ZuberK2012Np"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 The latter solution was supported by Wolfgang Pauli in a letter dated 4
 December 1930 to a group of physicists meeting in Tübingen, modern Germany,
 where he first proposed what we would call a neutrino today
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
In W Pauli's December 1930 letter, he referred to his proposed particle
 as the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

neutron
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, which is not the same neutron we know of today.
 At that point in time, the neutral particles inside the atomic nucleus,
 also called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

neutrons
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, had not been discovered, let alone understood.
 The neutron, which was discovered in 1932 by James Chadwick, has been formally
 associated as the neutral, cousin particle to the proton.
 It would be Enrico Fermi who would coin the particle in W Pauli's letter
 and solution to the 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

-decay spectrum a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

neutrino
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, meaning 
\shape italic
little neutral one
\shape default
.
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 Pauli's solution also predicted that the undetected neutrino would have
 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{1}{2}$
\end_inset

-spin, a quantum mechanical property of matter, since the observed particles
 in 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset

-decay did not conserve angular momentum.
 The existence of the neutrino and validation of Pauli's predictions would
 not experimentally verified for another 20 years.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The neutrino was first discovered in 1953 by Clyde Cowan and Frederick Reines
 using a nuclear reactor in South Carolina, U.S.A..
 Since then three types of neutrinos have been observed and from unique
 sources like the Sun and a supernova.
 Neutrino physics continues to be an active region of physics since neutrinos
 are unique probes to processes otherwise inaccessible in laboratories.
 For instance in the depths of the Sun's core where fusion occurs and neutrinos
 are created, neutrinos are able to travel through the ultra hot 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
todo{how hot?}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 medium of the core and outer layers of the Sun and reach us on Earth.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Neutrinos rarely interact with normal matter, meaning that they travel essential
ly unimpeded towards one's particle detector.
 The rarity of such interactions can be illustrated with the fact that given
 nearly 70
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
todo{verify number}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 billion neutrinos per square centimeter (the size of your thumbnail) per
 second are incident on the Earth from the Sun, statistically one solar
 neutrino can harmlessly interact with an individual.
 So this begs the question: how does one detect a neutrino? The short answer
 is one needs a ultra large volume of matter and a large enough flux of
 neutrinos in its path just to detect one given today's technology.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Scientists continue to be interested in neutrinos due to properties they
 exhibit.
 One of the more recent and surprising aspects about neutrinos is their
 ability to undergo 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

flavor oscillations
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 where a neutrino of definite flavor (type) is created and later observed
 as a different flavor.
 The impact of such oscillations could help explain the observed matter
 and anti-matter asymmetry in the Universe.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Neutrinos in the Standard Model
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics is the theory that describes
 the electromagnetic, strong nuclear, and weak nuclear forces and the elementary
 particles therein.
 These three forces and the gravitational force constitute the four 
\shape italic
known
\shape default
 fundamental forces of the Universe.
 Each force in the SM is mediated by a elementary particle called a gauge
 boson.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
